.. _release_notes_0_23:

What's new in 0.23
==================

scikit-survival 0.23.1 (2024-11-04)
-----------------------------------

This release adds support for Python 3.13.
The minimum required version for pandas has been bumped to pandas 1.4.0.

Bug fixes
^^^^^^^^^
- Add `SurvivalAnalysisMixin` base class to :class:`sksurv.ensemble.ExtraSurvivalTrees`
  to enable the :meth:`sksurv.ensemble.ExtraSurvivalTrees.score` method that has been
  unintentionally removed in 0.23.0 (:issue:`488`).

Enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Improve performance of :func:`sksurv.metrics.concordance_index_censored` and
  :func:`sksurv.metrics.concordance_index_ipcw` (:issue:`465`).

Backwards incompatible changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Support for pandas versions before 1.4.0 has been dropped.


scikit-survival 0.23.0 (2024-06-30)
-----------------------------------

This release adds support for scikit-learn 1.4 and 1.5, which
includes :ref:`missing value support <tree_missing_value_support>`
for :class:`sksurv.ensemble.RandomSurvivalForest`.

Moreover, this release fixes critical bugs. When fitting :class:`sksurv.tree.SurvivalTree`,
the `sample_weight` is now correctly considered when computing the log-rank statistic
for each split. This change also affects :class:`sksurv.ensemble.RandomSurvivalForest` and
:class:`sksurv.ensemble.ExtraSurvivalTrees` which pass `sample_weight` to the individual
trees in the ensemble.

This release fixes a bug in :class:`sksurv.ensemble.ComponentwiseGradientBoostingSurvivalAnalysis`
and :class:`sksurv.ensemble.GradientBoostingSurvivalAnalysis` when dropout is used.
Previously, dropout was only applied starting with the third iteration, now dropout is applied
in the second iteration too.

Finally, this release adds compatibility with numpy 2.0 and drops support for Python 3.8.

Bug fixes
^^^^^^^^^
- Fix issue with `dropout` in :class:`sksurv.ensemble.ComponentwiseGradientBoostingSurvivalAnalysis`
  and :class:`sksurv.ensemble.GradientBoostingSurvivalAnalysis`, where it was only applied starting with the third iteration.
- Fix LogrankCriterion in :class:`sksurv.tree.SurvivalTree` to handle `sample_weight` correctly (:issue:`464`).

Enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Fix deprecations with pandas 2.2.
- Drop importlib-resources dependency.
- Add support for scikit-learn 1.4 (:issue:`441`).
- Add `warm_start` support to :class:`sksurv.ensemble.ComponentwiseGradientBoostingSurvivalAnalysis`.
- Add missing values support to :class:`sksurv.ensemble.RandomSurvivalForest`.
- Add `require_y` tag to :class:`sksurv.base.SurvivalAnalysisMixin`.
- Upgrade to ruff 0.4.3 (:issue:`456`).
- Add support for scikit-learn 1.5 (:issue:`461`).

Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Fix :func:`sksurv.nonparametric.kaplan_meier_estimator` documentation to give correct default value for `conf_type` (:issue:`430`).
- Fix allowed values for `kernel` in :class:`sksurv.svm.FastSurvivalSVM` and :class:`sksurv.svm.MinlipSurvivalAnalysis` (:issue:`444`).
- Fix typo in API doc of :class:`sksurv.ensemble.RandomSurvivalForest` and :class:`sksurv.ensemble.ExtraSurvivalTrees` (:issue:`446`).
- Fix API doc for the `criterion` parameter of :class:`sksurv.ensemble.GradientBoostingSurvivalAnalysis` (:issue:`449`).
- Update links to scipy, pandas and numpy documentation.
- Fix letter of hyper-parameter used in the formula for :class:`sksurv.linear_model.IPCRidge` (:issue:`454`).
- Upgrade Sphinx to 7.3 and pydata-sphinx-theme to 0.15 (:issue:`455`).

Backwards incompatible changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Drop support for Python 3.8 (:issue:`427`).
